[Music]
Catherine Dickens is far less known than
her legendary husband Charles when you
think about Victorian novels his name is
the first one to pop up but the story of
mrs. Dickens life is very much like a
novel itself a woman of many talents a
devoted wife and mother of ten she made
a desperate move and divorced her
husband for many years
Dickens biographers treated her as
foolish and impulsive but it's high time
you knew the truth about her the Dickens
you say well I'm about to Katherine
Hogarth was born in Scotland in May 1815
she was the first of ten children
brought up in a good intelligent family
her father George Hogarth was a musical
critic and a journalist in 1830 the
Hogarth's moved to London where five
years later George got the position of
editor of the evening Chronicle where he
became acquainted with Charles Dickens
he gave the young and talented writer a
job in his newspaper Hogarth
also invited Dickens to his home in
Kensington where he met 19-year old
Catherine she was a smart and beautiful
young woman and Dickens liked her at
once
Charles was dreaming of a loving
close-knit family and Catherine was
perfect for the role of a good housewife
a thoughtful mother and an intelligent
friend Charles invited Catherine to
celebrate his 23rd birthday after that
she started liking him too and soon
agreed to marry him a year later they
got married and were happy just like all
newlyweds are they were young free and
joyful no domestic or financial problems
would distract them from enjoying each
other they would go to theaters and
parties Charles called his Catherine his
best half wifey and mrs. D he wrote in
his diary that he would never be as
happy as in their small flat on the
second floor even if he became rich and
famous
nine months after the wedding in 1837
the Dickens had their firstborn Charles
Jr Katherine was sick and could hardly
breastfeed her baby which caused her to
struggle with postpartum depression
Charles tried to support his wife and
was happy to have an heir but Katherine
was afraid that her son wouldn't love
her because she didn't erson herself
later Katherine had three more children
before the birth of their fifth child
the couple visited America Dickens had
had huge success there his novels
immediately became bestsellers but he
didn't get paid for any of them because
of the tricky copyright rules so he had
to travel across the Atlantic to settle
that matter Charles and Catherine
traveled on a ship that hardly made it
to the US they met several harsh storms
a fire on board and the ship ran aground
when they came to Nova Scotia though the
journey was full of hardships Catherine
stayed cheerful and persevering Charles
wrote to his friend that she had never
lost courage or felt blooming she
adapted to any circumstances without
complaint Catherine was not only a brave
traveler but a good actress and
excellent cook and even a writer she
acted in Charles a mature place and
wrote and published a cookbook what
shall we have for dinner the book had a
lot of menus for complex and simple
meals recipes and advice on housekeeping
for young wives the book was a
best-seller and was re-edited several
times until 1860 mmm what could go wrong
for a happy family blessed with so many
talents well when Catherine gave birth
to their fifth child
Charles was no longer happy about having
a large family for the first time he
complained about having so many children
he wrote in his diary that he was hoping
not to have any more but life doesn't
always go how you hope it will within 15
years Catherine had given birth to a
total of ten children no wonder she was
under so much stress and
nothing like the young and pretty woman
Charles married Charles blamed Katherine
that they had so many children after all
she came from a huge family to his best
half was getting more and more on his
nerves finally Charles concluded that
they weren't made for each other
he would tell his friends that his wife
was cold and apathetic too narrow minded
too stout too plain too nervous too
possessive and yes she was always crying
and was a bad mother after the birth of
their youngest son Charles saw to it
that they had no more children he
ordered their bedroom to be divided soon
after that in spring 1858 a fatal
mistake put an end to the dickens
marriage a bracelet that Charles had
bought for a young 18 year old actress
Ellen Ternan was delivered to their
house instead the postman mixed up the
address and Catherine immediately knew
that her suspicions were correct she
confronted Charles but instead of
apologizing he said it was quite common
for him to give small presents to actors
who took part in his place
why would his dear wife he be mad
Charles insisted that Catherine should
go to Ellen give her the bracelet and
apologize for her insulting behavior
Catherine had had enough
she left Charles forever later it became
clear that Dickens had met Ellen a year
before that and had rented an apartment
for her her mother and her sisters
the actress accompanied him everywhere
though there was no romantic
relationship between them at the time
Charles officially announced his divorce
in 1858 in a family magazine the
household worlds he addressed the
readers explaining that he had come to a
friendly agreement with his ex-wife the
thing is that the Victorians treated
marriage as something that couldn't be
broken but if it did happen a woman had
rights that's why it was only the eldest
son Charles Jr who left the family house
together with Katherine according to the
laws of that time all the other children
had to stay with her father
Dickens didn't approve of the meetings
with her mother though he wouldn't
openly forbid them he insisted that both
daughters didn't invite Katherine to
their weddings they also didn't tell her
about her fourth son Walter passing away
the society condemned Katherine and
considered her unworthy of her famous
genius husband how can one love a plain
woman who doesn't look after herself is
always in a bad mood and doesn't want to
live up to her husband's demands a
genius has a right to choose someone
better doesn't he there were few people
who felt sorry for Katherine after
everything she went through she could
hardly stay healthy pretty and cheerful
Kate the second daughter wrote that
there wasn't anything awful about her
mother she had faults like all humans
but she was also a kind person and a
true lady she had been afraid of her
husband and had no right to speak up or
talk about her feelings when they were
together
Katherine lived alone till the end of
her life she outlived Charles by nine
years and passed away in 1879 before her
death she gave her correspondence with
him to Kate and asked her to pass it on
to the British Museum so that the world
would know that he'd loved her once she
was buried in the Highgate Cemetery in
London close to her daughter Dora it was
only 139 years after Katherine's death
in 2016 that her great-great-great
granddaughter
Lucinda Oxley who was an author and
lecturer herself defended her
she said that Dickens biographers hadn't
done justice to the woman who was a good
wife and mother but had a very uneasy
life with Charles they live many happy
years together but the burden of
housekeeping and multiple pregnancies
did little good to Katherine while huge
literary Fame changed Charles for the
worse another proof of that is the
correspondence found in 2014 by
Professor John Bowen
he works at the University of York and
specializes in 19th century fiction the
discovered letters show that before
getting an official divorce Charles
tried to institutionalize his wife based
on a fake diagnosis he tried to convince
a doctor to declare Katherine insane
fortunately he never succeeded with his
plan and while she was blamed for the
end of their marriage she can at least
rest in peace now knowing the truth
behind it all finally came out do you
feel sorry for Katherine or do you think
Charles Dickens deserved a better wife
let me know down in the comments if you
learned something new today then give
this video a like and share it with a
friend but hey don't go anywhere just
yet we have over 2,000 cool videos for
you to check out all you have to do is
pick the left or right video click on it
and enjoy stay on the bright side of
life